By Greg Ip, Danny Dougherty and Anthony DeBarros

The coronavirus has unleashed a massive economic shock on the U.S. and the world. 
It began with disruptions to supply chains and restrictions on travel and is now 
rapidly expanding via spontaneous and government-imposed “social distancing” measures 
such as closing schools and confining regional populations to their homes. 
Entire industries are shutting down. It is “a sudden stop to the global economy,” 
said Mohamed El-Erian, an adviser to German insurer Allianz.

There is no clear historical precedent for the scale and nature of this shock. 
Some economists see U.S. output falling by more in the coming quarter than in 
the worst quarter of the 2008-09 recession. Nonetheless, previous episodes of 
pandemics, disasters and crises offer clues about what to expect, how policy makers make 
matters better or worse and the likely long-term consequences.

A few lessons stand out. First, governments and the public always face a trade-off between 
economic stability and public health and safety. The more they prioritize health and safety,
 the bigger the near-term cost to the economy, and vice versa.

Second, at the outset of the disaster, policy makers are coping with enormous uncertainty. 
Early responses are often timid or off-target and more sweeping action is delayed by political disagreement.

“We learned that we need to prioritize speed, think in tranches, be visible and worry about how to pay for it later,” 
said Tim Adams who served in the Treasury Department during 9/11 and Hurricane Katrina and is now president of the Institute of International Finance.
 “If you wait to craft the perfect response, you’ll lose valuable time and you’ll miss something no matter what.”

Third, disasters often create permanent changes to habits, and the most affected industries and regions can take years to recover.
 New Orleans’ population has steadily regained ground since falling by half after Hurricane Katrina but isn’t yet back to its prestorm level.
 But for society as a whole, the scars heal remarkably quickly. Humans are immensely adaptable.

Spanish Flu
Starting in 1918, the Spanish flu would kill 50 million people, or 3 percent of the world’s population.

Sources: National Bureau of Economic Research (production, employment), FactSet (stock indexes)
While the coronavirus isn’t a flu virus, the pandemic resembles the influenza pandemics of the 20th century, in that it is highly infectious and relatively lethal.
 The deadliest was the Spanish flu in 1918, which infected at least 500 million people world-wide (more than a quarter of the Earth’s population)
 and killed 50 million or more, including 675,000 in the U.S., according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.


Members of the American Red Cross handle Spanish influenza victims in St. Louis, Mo., in 1918.
PHOTO: ZUMA PRESS
Yet the economic impact was surprisingly mild. The National Bureau of Economic Research says a recession began in August 1918 and ran through the next March.
 The flu probably wasn’t the cause. In a 2006 paper for Canada’s Department of Finance, 
Steven James and Tim Sargent found little trace of the pandemic in international trade, retail sales, railroad passenger traffic and stock prices.
 They saw some effect on industrial production, which fell sharply 
in October and November but that was in part due to falling defense production as World War I drew to a close. 
They put the pandemic’s effect at a 0.5% decline in annual output.

City death rates
There are likely several reasons. Far fewer people worked in jobs that required close social contact. 
Farming, fishing and forestry accounted for 16% of American occupations in 1910 compared with 0.3% in 2004, according to Messrs. 
James and Sargent. Few workers had sick leave, and unemployment insurance didn’t exist. Thus, workers who were sick or at risk could seldom afford to stay home.

The second is that governments, many preoccupied with war, didn’t put the same weight on stopping the epidemic as they do now. 
The federal government had little formal role fighting infectious disease. President Woodrow Wilson never publicly mentioned the epidemic,
 John Barry writes in “The Great Influenza: The Story of the Deadliest Pandemic in History.” 
Chicago’s public health commissioner flatly rejected closing businesses,
 Mr. Barry wrote, quoting him as saying: “It is our duty to keep the people from fear. Worry kills more people than the epidemic.”

